So, hi.
I'm Matt.
My main thing I do, I'm on the core Astro
team for the Astro Web Framework.
I also work at Cloudflare, but I'm not here
to talk about any of that today.
I'm here to talk about Cirrus, which is my PD
S.
So, I have built a PDS that I use to help
self-host, and I hopefully might convince some of you people here
to self-host your PDS as well.
But first, what is a PDS?
PDS is a personal data server.
It is where all of your stuff is on the AppR
oto network.
Now, a lot of people here probably know this, but your PD
S holds pretty much everything on the AppRoto network for
you.
It's all of your posts, of course, but it's also
all of your likes and your friends and your whole social graph,
but it's also everything from any of your other third-party
apps that you're working with.
All of the different network, all of the things on the App
Roto network live on your PDS.
They also, all of the blobs live on there as well,
which are, you know, the files, the images, and the videos, and
things like that.
So, the whole point of a PDS is to make it
so that you are able to have the network as decentralized, so
that you own all of your data.
And what I didn't realize is, as well as being where
all your data is, it's also where you talk to.
So, it's where your API calls go when you're using
the network.
So, when you've got the, like, Blue Sky app, for example,
on your phone or on the web, it's not talking to
Blue Sky when it's connected.
If you look at the network panel, and honestly, I mean, the
first time I knew this was when I opened up the network
panel and saw that it was hitting my PDF.
You talk directly to your PDS.
So, all of your connections and everything go directly to your PD
S.
So, most of the stuff a PDS does is talking to
you.
This, obviously, your PDS doesn't have all of the data
on it.
Most of the data on the network is somewhere else.
So, for anything that it doesn't have, like all of your
timeline and everything else, it proxies it to the app
view, which, you know, in most cases is Blue Sky, which holds
everything.
But how does the relay, how does Blue Sky or the rest
of the network get your data?
It's done through a relay.
So, there are two relays that Blue Sky has, U.
S.
East and U.
West.
They recently changed them around.
And, basically, your PDS, when you publish something, it sends it
out to the relay.
So, the way that works is it's a web socket, like
a permanent web socket.
The relay connects to your web socket, and it's, whenever you
post something, it sends it out into the relay.
And, as you can probably see from this at the moment, it
's not actually doing a huge amount of work, the PDS,
per person.
It's only doing something when you post on it or when
you make a query on it.
Because the app view isn't, so when somebody goes and looks
at your timeline, they aren't hitting your PDS.
What they're doing is it's being relayed to the
app view from the relays.
And the relays hold every single post on the network.
Every single record, every single event on the network goes through the
relays, and they send it off to the app view.
So, all of the work, really, the heavy work, is done by
the relays and the app view.
So, it's a PDS, doesn't actually do a huge
amount of work, but, and you can, anyone can host them, but
that's not what people are doing.
So, you know, 99 point, this, I mean, these are numbers out
of last week.
99.
4% of all users are using the Blue Sky PDS
s.
They're the mushroom ones.
They're named after mushrooms.
There are some, obviously, fast-growing other PDS hosts.
The new kid on the block is Eurosky.
I'm not including the bridgey ones on here, because they
don't really count.
But the bridgey one is like 10 times more than that,
but I'm not including it, because they're not real, you
know, not real accounts.
So, Eurosky is the new kid.
It's grown very fast and has managed to make it all
the way up to almost 0.
02% of all users.
I mean, I think, and obviously, Black Sky is also very, you
know, is a very solid percentage of users in terms of the
ones who are using a third-party PDS or an independent
PDS.
And then there's another, you know, less than 3,000 PD
Ss out there, which, you know, collectively make up, you know,
0.
03% of users.
And that includes all of mine.
Now, why is that?
Why is it that people aren't hosting these things?
It's because it's really heavy and not designed for hosting
an individual thing.
This is the Blue Sky reference PDS is a, like, a
Docker image.
There's a hell of a lot of stuff going on in
there.
It's, you know, it's well-documented, and you can
host it, and it's great for hosting thousands of users, but
it is complete overkill for hosting a single account.
So, I wanted to build something that was easier and that was
simpler and was a bit more like how you would host a
single website.
You know, if you're deploying a little single-user website, you
're not going to spin up, most people are not going to
spin up a Docker image.
They're not going to hold, you know, ran up a whole
thing that's got, you know, all the databases and all that
kind of stuff.
Most people will just deploy it to a serverless platform or
something and host it for free somewhere.
And I, you know, I thought, let's, you know, why can
't we do PDSs that are as simple as that?
So, I'm going to show doing exactly that.
So, this is my risky demo.
This is where I'm going to attempt to actually deploy this.
So, I've...
Yes, I can call that up there.
So, I somehow managed to get the create PDS name on
NPM.
So, I'm making a big thing of that and have made
stickers with it and everything because I'm so pleased that I
got hold of the PDS name.
So, what I'm going to do is NPM create PD
S.
Actually, I'm going to do PNPM because I don
't want to wait around all day.
Well, I can get there in.
I'm watching this on the screen mirroring on here.
So, it's not the easiest things of doing.
So, this is just like a CLI that what I wanted
to do was just to make it as easy as possible.
Because moving over to a different PDS is actually, there's
quite a lot involved.
You know, there's a lot of tools out there for helping
you, like PDS mover and so on.
But what I wanted to do was to make something that worked
end-to-end.
Now, if I ran through this without talking, it would take less
than a minute.
It wouldn't be much of a talk.
So, I'm going to spin it out a bit.
You bear with me.
I hope you don't get bored.
So, folder name.
Okay, I'm going to call this Atmo PDS.
Package manner, PNPM, initialize git repository.
Now, the point for this is it creates like a little folder,
like you are deploying a website on your computer.
And it's just pulling it down, setting up a PDS.
I'm not going to migrate my account on this demo here.
I'm going to YOLO this a bit, but I
'm not going to try migrating my primary account or any.
I mean, also, it can take a while because it's got
to move all of your blobs from one to the other.
So, that is the bit that takes a long time.
When I moved my main account, it took about 10 minutes to
move between them.
I'm sure that there are people who've complained to me
that once they started to get to 50 gig, it was hitting
limits.
So, some people post considerably more than I do.
So, I'm not.
And then this is where the domain is.
Now, I said before that I work at Cloudflare.
This is not a sponsored talk.
One of the key things that's going to come out of
this is that you can do this without paying Cloudflare
anything.
The idea is that this is, you know, basically free tier.
Maybe you'll pay a penny or so for the blob hosting.
But you need a domain that is on Cloudflare.
So, I'm going to do atmos.
mk.
gg.
Now, I'm going to choose the same account handle as the
domain.
And that unlocks something that makes everything a lot easier.
Because if I've got the same name and the same as
the PDF, because this is a single user.
This is something we can do.
The PDF is also able to serve the documents, the identity documents.
So, you don't need to do any verification.
So, while I go through this, I'm not going to be
going off and doing any DNS records or anything like that.
I'm going to just say, yeah, I'm going to choose
the same thing.
And I'm generating a did web document.
So, if you know what a did web is, then great.
Well done.
I'm in the only place in the world where there's
going to be more than about three people who do know what
that is.
But for those who don't, did plc is the centralized
record.
So, the did is your kind of unique identifier that you can
take around even if you change your handle.
Did plc is the centralized one where it's sort of
like managed for you on the plc directory, which you'll
find at plc.
directory, which is hosted by Blue Sky.
Did web is a kind of more simple, but it's got
some downsides.
But basically, all that is involved for hosting a did web is
that you have a file on a web server somewhere that's
like .
wellknown-did.
json.
I am going to use the same domain for my did, my
handle, and my PDS, which means that I can host them
all, which makes everything a hell of a lot easier.
Worker name, that doesn't mean anything.
That just has to be unique per my account.
So, I'm going to take this opportunity to have a sip
of water.
So, this one, I think some of you people here might find
this interesting.
You can choose where your data goes.
Now, this is going on Cloudflare, as I said.
It's storing it in a durable object, which is one of
these weird things that we have at Cloudflare that I
didn't really understand until I started working there a few months
ago.
And as soon as I started working there, I was like, I
want to use these for everything because they're amazingly cool.
That's my sales pitch for the day.
But one of the things you can do with a durable object
is they come with their own little embedded SQLite database, and
you can say where you want it to go.
So, most people would say automatic, which will basically put it near
to where you are when you first create it.
But we also, if you want to have data localization, you
can have a guaranteed localization in the EU.
So, this one is where it's guaranteed and is GDPR
compliant and e-privacy and whatever.
So, you can choose that.
Or you can just say if you want it to be located
near, you know, if you're creating it at a conference, which
is not where you are, you want to say, actually, I want
it to be created somewhere else.
These are not ones that are going to give you a guaranteed
location, but I'm going to just choose auto.
So, I said that there was downsides to using a did
web.
If you're using did PLC, you need a signing key
to sign all of your records.
If you're using PLC, then you can rotate your signing
key.
So, it's not quite so much of a disaster if you
lose your signing key.
If you are self-hosting your did web and you lose
your signing key, you are screwed.
You basically can't sign any more records anymore.
So, save them.
I am not going to save this.
I'm going to save it to a file because this is
disposable.
Have you saved your signing key securely?
So, there's a password.
Now, I wanted to make this all as non-password as
possible.
So, this is most stuff I can do on here I do
using passkeys.
But obviously, as many people here know, Blue Sky doesn't support
passkeys.
So, I need a password.
And the password is just in order to sign into Blue Sky
itself.
I'm going to generate one automatically.
So, you've noticed that this is saying that a lot of
these things have got saved to 1Password.
That's just because it's detected that I've got 1
Password CLI installed.
So, it will just use that.
I'm going to copy it to the clipboard.
But if you're doing it with 1Password, that's
the easiest because it saves it as a Blue Sky login.
So, it just works straight away.
And so, I'm going to copy it to clipboard.
So, now I just need to remember to not copy anything else
before I finish this demo.
The email address, I don't use the email address in this
at all.
In fact, I don't have it even wired up to email
sending because it's a single user.
So, I don't need to verify anything.
I don't need to notify.
I don't need to, you know, if I'm moving away,
I don't need to, like, send it.
But, so, the reason I support email addresses is that some services
want one.
So, the first one that I ran into that with was deck.
blue, which gave a perverse error message that I eventually tracked
down to, meaning that I needed an email address.
So, you can create an email address and we will use it
for nothing at all.
So, now we've saved all those secrets locally.
I'm going to push those to Cloudflare.
None of those are secrets.
You can see up there.
But I'm just going to push the secrets.
And now, I'm going to deploy it to Cloudfl
are.
And this is the risky bit.
So, I'm compiling this with Vite.
It's basically, this whole thing is just a, it's all
written in TypeScript.
The actual thing it's generated, if I've got time at
the end of this, I can show what it's generated, is
basically a Cloudflare worker that is two lines.
It's literally just importing and exporting the handler for it.
But I've created a whole project in there so that I
've got somewhere to put all of your secrets.
So, it does mean that I, for every single account that I
've created on here, I've got a separate folder in my
repos directory.
So, that's the downside of single-user PDSs.
I'm sure there's a smarter way I could do it.
But I wanted to make sure this was single-user.
So, that should actually be live now.
So, I am going to attempt to, oh, I almost did something
very stupid there.
Nobody stopped me.
I'm going to, that's not what I, yeah.
That's where I'm at.
So, the very first thing I'm going to do is log
in.
So, this bit here is where you choose which PDS.
So, this is a hosting provider.
It means PDS.
So, my PDS that I, it was Atmos, wasn't
it?
You can see Atmo 2.
That was this morning's run through.
So, if this has gone wrong, that would be the video you
would be watching.
Atmos.
mk.
gg.
So, that's the PDS.
And because we use the same, I'm going to do At
mos.
mk.
gg here.
And place, that looks about the right length.
I think we've lucked out.
Add your birth date.
Yeah, that'll do.
The, if I'm in, I don't know why it started
doing this.
Because I did set it up that it verifies me.
Because I'm in the UK.
So, in the UK, you have to verify your age on this.
So, I've got it hard-coded that everyone is verified
when you create it.
Because, you know, if you're responsible enough to create your own
PDS, then you're responsible enough to chat with people.
So, I've, I have now got this account on here.
Now, if you were to go and look for me and I
was to post anything, nothing was actually going to happen.
So, what I'm going to do here is actually connect to
the network.
So, this is, okay.
So, this is the dashboard.
So, this is how, obviously, we showed before that we were having
to be part of the network.
The, the Blue Sky network has to know that we exist.
This, I managed to log in here without the Blue Sky, without
the whole Atmos, Atproto network knowing I exist, because
I talk directly to my PDS here.
So, as far as, you know, the network knows, I don't
exist.
But, as far as my browser here knows, I have just gone,
gone through a, you know, a jot signing, hit the APIs, all
that bloody blah.
So, at the moment, nobody knows.
But, I've got one subscriber here.
That one subscriber is me.
That is the, the dashboard connecting to it.
So, nothing is going on there.
Oh, my God.
I was hoping this might happen.
So, some people know about me.
What I'm going to do here is I'm going to
request the crawl.
And what that is doing is telling the relays I exist.
And look, U.
S.
East and U.
West now know I exist.
Basically, what this did is just pinged them with a, with
a crawl request.
And now, we can see that the firehose is connected.
So, we've got two things connected on the firehose.
They're at cursor zero because we have nothing in this repo.
So, let's change that one.
Let's write a post.
I'm going to say, hello, Atmosphere.
And let's post that.
There we go.
So, this is the event here that has happened on the, on
the, the firehose.
So, this is my, this is my most trickly little fire
hose you're going to get.
I've dropped a single, a single event has come off that,
that firehose.
And I can see it's worked because it's shown up
here.
It wouldn't have shown up otherwise.
If, if the thing's not working, it wouldn't show up.
So, what some people here might find is that if you search
for me on blue sky, I may not be visible because it
might not have been indexed.
So, what I was trying, and I might be able to do
this, is, it is visible?
The account is visible.
It is visible.
So, I've got 10 followers now.
Well, I can see all this stuff going on here.
So, I've still only got one post.
I've not done anything else.
So, I think the first thing I need to do is give
myself a name.
I'm going to just say, I'm going to say that
I am Atmo PDS account.
I know, very interesting.
And so, what that has done is that's created another record
here.
So, this is the profile is a record itself.
So, but now I've got all of these followers.
So, if I follow all of these people back, you can see
that this is creating a follow record.
So, each one of you people here, say, say, hi, if you
're, if you're one of the people I'm following.
Each one of these here is creating a new record.
Now, if I was to then go on to any one of
these other atmosphere, non-blue sky things, and created another record on
here, it would show up.
So, you can see I've got three types of thing here.
I've got a lot of follows in there.
But I think what I'm going to do is I'm
going to go and see Willow's stuff, because I know
that she writes some good things.
And I'm going to say, oh, yes, those are amazing stickers.
Oh, hi, James.
I'm going to like both of these.
And there we can see those are coming up through as likes
on there as well.
These notifications are not on the network.
What I've got here is I'm directly logging in to
the app view to grab the notifications, because the notifications are authent
icated, which means that they can't be on the app protein
network itself.
So, basically, it's the same as the stuff that's coming
through on that.
So, what I've got is that I'm able to show
all of these things that we've created.
And this is, you know, this, if I'd done this without
waffling, that would have taken less than a minute.
And some of you people here might have tried it out while
I've been sitting here.
You would, I mean, the difficult part is you would need an
account with a domain on Cloudflare.
You also, unfortunately, do need a credit card or a card or
some payment method, not because we're going to charge you, but
because we need to store blobs on there.
And blobs are massively abused on Cloudflare.
People, you know, put all kinds of crap up there, which means
that you can't put blobs, you can't use R
2, which is the S3 compatible thing, without a card on
there.
So, even though, you know, it will, if you get charged, it
will be pennies, but that's the way that that goes.
So, let's, that was, I'm not done yet, guys.
Thanks for the applause.
But I haven't told you how it works yet.
So, I'm going to put my glasses on so I can
see you lovely people again, and I'm going to actually talk
about how this thing works.
I've got, still got a few minutes, six minutes.
Okay, I've got time to talk about how it works.
So, it's inside Cloudflare.
It's, that's mainly just because it's an easy way
for me to put everything all in one place.
And the key part of that is the, the fire hose.
And I'll get into why that, why that's, that's
special.
But basically, so as I said, the client is, you know, the
browser, the web browser or the, or your mobile app.
And that talks to the worker, which is basically, it's running
a HONO little web server on there that just does
the XRPC API endpoints.
There's like a load of API endpoints that it serves
on there.
And it's, you know, doing the sending messages to it.
And the durable object, which I mentioned there, is where the, the
kind of the magic happens in there.
So, it's got a SQLite database in there, which stores
your whole repo in there.
All of the MST stuff in there is all one big
database or little database, really.
And then there's the fire hose.
Now, the fire hose is the thing that makes it really difficult
to host a PDS on a serverless platform in most
cases.
So, you can't put it on like an AWS Lambda or
something like that because it needs a continuously connected web socket.
The actual thing that made me, like, decide to build this was
when I heard about, found out that you could do hibern
ating web sockets on durable objects.
What that means is that you can have a web socket on
this, on this PDS that is open all the time and
connected to the relay all the time.
But you're not paying unless you are sending an event.
If there is nothing going from it, it just goes to sleep.
It hibernates it.
But as far as the relay is concerned, it's still connected.
It thinks that it's connected, but it's actually just being
held by, you know, some part of our Cloudflow infra or
something.
But when you then want to add, send an event, when you
're posting something, it wakes it up and pings it off
onto the relay and you get charged for a few seconds.
Well, you don't get charged because it will be within the
free tier unless, I think, even the craziest of posters won't
be able to get outside the free tier on this one.
And then it uses R2 for storing all the blobs.
That's all still inside Cloudflare.
And then it proxies it to the app view, which
is, you know, wherever it is.
And I didn't show you a few things.
So there's account migration, which is built in.
So that was one of the things.
I didn't want you to have to use any third-party
service, however good they are.
I wanted it to all be just done through this Create PD
S workflow.
So if you are using, if you are migrating something, you
will move over to where, you know, it will take you through
a different flow.
You'll put in your password and it will migrate everything.
It will download it all and then upload it.
And then it will help you do the PLC, the did
PLC migration and all that kind of stuff.
It uses passkeys for most stuff.
I was going to demo passkeys, but it sticks a bloody
great QR code up on the screen.
So I was like, no, this is probably not the best way
of doing that.
But that's something I'm particularly pleased with because to add
a passkey on there, it does a QR code in the
terminal that you can use to scan it.
And that works for all of the, you know, all the third-
party services and everything.
So this is a personal data server.
This is the thing.
This is you can build one for yourself.
And I think there are, I think that there's a, you
know, most people do want to have their PDS hosted by
Blue Sky.
You know, that's where it makes sense to do it.
But I think that if we want the app proto network to
be properly decentralized, we need to have lots of different ways of
hosting.
And I think that, you know, it needs to be easy for
a service to have their own PDS.
You know, one of the, any of these other services can provide
it for their users.
They want, and, but I think there also needs to be an
easy way for people to deploy it themselves.
And I think that one of the things that I really love
about this group of all of us, you know, weirdos and
most affectionately here is that it reminds me a lot of
early web stuff.
And one of the whole things about the early web is that
you could, you know, deploy your own stuff and do all kinds
of, and I think that the fact that all of the reference
architecture of the atmosphere is blue sky stuff.
It means that it's, you know, very much angled, not just
towards the social use case, but also to the massive scale.
And it's great that people are building all these other different
implementations.
But I think that we need more ways for people to just
make this as easy as, you know, sticking something on Netl
ify or Vercel or Cloudflare or whatever, whatever
you think of them.
They are a very, very easy way of putting a website up.
And I wanted this to be a way to make it that
easy to put a PDF up.
So hopefully some people will try this out.
Follow me.
Follow my 15 other variations of this that I used over the
past week while I've been practicing.
I'm sure they're all going to have really useful things
to say.
And thank you, everybody.
One minute.